README.md, before:

# btrfs2cloud-backup

A simple script to backup a btrfs sub-volume to any cloud supported by rclone.

## Features

- Use [snapper](https://github.com/openSUSE/snapper) to take a read-only snapshot
- Use a single pipe to upload the volume to the cloud, no need to save it to a file before uploading
- Compress the volume with zstd
- Encrypt it with openssl
- Send it to your favorite cloud using [rclone](https://rclone.org/)
- through a file, allow to know if a backup was completed or not.

## Structure

- `install.sh`: simple script to simplify the setup, it will detect all the snapper configs and, for each one create a service and timer.
- `remove.sh`: `rm -i` of all the files created by the install script
- `btrfs2cloud.sh`: The main script of this project. After some checks, it will create a snapper snapshot, than upload it. At the end it will write `ok` into `state.txt` so you can be sure that the backup was successful.
- `btrfs2cloud.service` and `btrfs2cloud.timer`: templates of the unit files, during the install script they will be copied, renamed and replaced the template with the name of the config they refer to.
- `config`: config file that need to be edited.

Commit message:

adding documentation on how to restore a snapshot

README.md, after:

# btrfs2cloud-backup

A simple script to backup a btrfs sub-volume to any cloud supported by rclone.

## description

This script allow to backup a btrfs sub-volume to any cloud supported by rclone. Is meant for a disaster-recovery situation and do not support incremental snapshots.
The snapshot themselves are managed by snapper, this way you can set up a clean-up service and they wont pile up.
The snapshots are compressed and encrypted while they are uploaded.
Is possible to confirm the validity of a snapshot with the `state.txt` file, it's content become `ok` only after the upload is completed.

## Features

- Use [snapper](https://github.com/openSUSE/snapper) to take a read-only snapshot.
- Use a single pipe to upload the volume to the cloud, no need to save it to a file before uploading.
- Compress the volume with zstd.
- Encrypt it with openssl.
- Send it to your favorite cloud using [rclone](https://rclone.org/).
- Use a flock to avoid that 2 timers fire at the same time.
- Use systemd-inhibit to inhibit poweroff / reboot while a snapshot is being uploaded.
- through a file, allow to know if a backup was completed or not.

## Structure

- `install.sh`: simple script to simplify the setup, it will detect all the snapper configs and, for each one create a service and timer.
- `remove.sh`: `rm -i` of all the files created by the install script
- `btrfs2cloud.sh`: The main script of this project. After some checks, it will create a snapper snapshot, than upload it. At the end it will write `ok` into `state.txt` so you can be sure that the backup was successful.
- `btrfs2cloud.service` and `btrfs2cloud.timer`: templates of the unit files, during the install script they will be copied, renamed and replaced the template with the name of the config they refer to.
- `config`: config file that need to be edited.

## How to restore a snapshot

1. confirm that the snapshot is valid, download and open `state.txt`.
1. rename the sub-volume you want to restore: `mv @home @home.old`
1. reverse the pipe:

    ```bash
    rclone --config /home/user/.config/rclone/rclone.conf cat b2:backup/home/snapshot |
        openssl enc -d -aes256 -pass "pass:password" -pbkdf2 |
        zstd -d -c - | 
        btrfs receive .
    ```

1. Rename the sub-volume into it's original name: `mv snapshot @home`
1. Fix fstab in case the subvolid changed
